The following is an interview with Mr. Coulter
Hoppus, distinguished lawyer and longtime
resident of the Bryan College Station area. The
interview is being recorded in Mr. Hoppus's
office, which is located in the Virisco building
in downtown Bryan. The interviewer is John
O'Hara, and the date is March 30, 1976.
To begin with, I'd like to thank you for letting me
come and interview you.
What we're trying to do is find out something about
the early... This works as a microphone? Yes.
Okay.
What we're trying to do is get some information
about the early inhabitants of Bryan.
Between John O'Hara
and Coper Hoppus, conducted in the office of Coper
Hoppus in the Briscoe building in Bryan, Texas, at
5 o'clock p.m.
of the afternoon of March 30th, 1976, right? And
the purpose of this interview is to get background
information on early historical facts relating
to Bryan and College Station and Brazos County,
Texas. Okay, we'll go from there. To begin with,
could you tell me when and where you were born? I was
born in Hill County, Texas, in Hillsboro, in 1910,
October 1910.
Do you know where the Hoppus family came to Texas
from? My father came to Texas from Arkansas,
northeastern Arkansas. And they settled in Hill
County? Not immediately.
He was at many places in Texas working for the
railroad. He came here during the time the
railroads were being expanded and
eventuated as being a station agent in Hillsboro
for the Trinity and Brazos Valley Railroad, which
was derogatorily referred to as the Bow Wheel.
You, of course, didn't enjoy all that, but
practically all railroads had various names that
were applied to them, most of which related to the
rather long names which they adopted. Is that the
railroad that comes through here now? Is that the
same? No, no. This railroad has since merged with
Burlington, I believe, and the nearest place that
comes to Bryant is North Zuch, which is east of
here. But they, like the Missouri, Kansas, and
Texas is called Acadia,
you know. Yeah, well, that's
a railroad in Georgia called the Tallulah Falls
and something and of course on all the cars it had TF
and something. It wasn't a very good railroad and
it came out as a total failure. This was quite a
common in the time, Red Road building. Do you know
what year it was when it first came to Texas? My
father? No, I do not. When did he move to Bryan? He
never did move to Bryan. No. What caused your
family to come to Bryan? My family didn't come to
Bryan. I came to Bryan. I was orphaned and was
brought here. be reared by a grandmother when I was
12 years old. Can you tell me something about what
Brian was like or what you can first remember about
Brian
when you came? Well, yes, I can remember good many
things about it.
Primarily the only difference now and then has
been a rather large expansion of the residential
community in a southeasterly direction towards
College Station or towards A&M University.
The time I came here as a little boy, well, Texas A&M
University was much more remote from Bryan than it
is today, or Bryan was much more remote from it.
There was not a city of any kind at College Station.
or any surrounding residential areas. The
professors almost totally, when possible, lived
on the campus in houses furnished by the
university, by the college as it was called then.
Other workers lived in Brown,
The primary access was what is now called College
Road. It was a county road that
went on out there and automobiles were used to some
extent. But automobiles were not generally owned
or very popular in the early 1920s. They were just
beginning to be used.
on a utilitarian basis. Up to that time, they had
been pretty well playthings or sports things. Did
they ever have trolley trains here? Yes. There was
an electric interurban railroad that ran from the
Ursuline Academy, which is basically northeast,
on the northeast edge of Bryan, or the eastern edge
of Bryan, which is no longer there. down Ursuline
Avenue, as it's called, and thence into downtown
Bryan, thence out College Avenue, which
is now partially Texas Avenue, to what now is
called the Y, where actually Texas Avenue goes
south and east and College Road goes south, and
about where Woodson Lumber Company now situated
and at that point the Interurban Railroad track
took off cross country to Texas A&M University and
stopped or had the station at the north what is now
the north gate of Texas A&M and the right of way The
route that it followed is now Cabot Avenue. In
fact, the right-of-way that was owned by the
Interurban Railroad was acquired by the city of
Brown to use as a street. When did it cease to run its
route? I never know that there was a... About 1922.
It ceased? was having difficulty, and I believe
finally switched over totally to buses in 1927.
That's kind of off the top of my head, but I believe
that finally went totally to a bus system in 1927.
The buses ran more or less the same way? No, the
buses ran, of course, on the streets that were
available. How large was the city when Perth came
under it? Do you have any idea? I would say about
5,000 people in 1920. Was it mainly around what is
now the downtown area?
No, I don't know just how to describe it, but it was
about in the same... to a degree the same
confirmation as it is now with the exception of all
of the tremendous residential growth that has
occurred along Highway 6 which has become Texas
Avenue and to the east, south and east of that.
What were the main business areas? What? What were
the main business areas? Has it been downtown most
of the time? Yes, Main Street and the courthouse
area was the main business area at that time. What
has been the main business area?
Well, of course, in the very beginning, the
agricultural enterprise of the area was the
primary business. The cotton in the valley? Well,
both on the hill and in the valley, too. I mean,
there was a tremendous outbreak of cotton all over
the country along about World War I days when they
were seeking the cellulose of cotton to make
gunpowder. And this continued until about 1925
when there was a combination of a market crash and a
drought and crop failure and I don't know what all
and it's been somewhat declining since that time
according to my visualization.
I could not categorize and it would not be correct
in my mind to say that Texas A&M University has been
the business of the main business of Bryan but I
don't think there's ever been any doubt of what
the funds that have been used or the funds that were
brought into the area by the Texas A&M College and
its affiliated agencies and have been expended
here have certainly constituted a major portion
of the economic base of the community.
Do you think that the university has contributed
more Oh, I think
that there's no question. I think all business
research studies and everything will show that
the
so-called local expenditures of the university
is the largest, by many millions of dollars, the
largest injection
of funds into the economy in the community. And of
course, and that doesn't, of course, they
multiply themselves through the use of
individual people.
I may get back to what you were talking about. Where
did you go to school? What school? Baylor
University at Waco. Okay, I mean, beginning with
the elementary school and the high school. Well,
there were only two. The present Bowie School was
called the Westside Elementary School, and the
present Fannin School
was called the Eastside Elementary School and
Brown High School. Yes, no, the high school was on
where Fannin is now, and was located in the same
building as there. And incidentally, that's the
same property that the first school ever built in
Bryan was on, on that property at the corner of the
29th and Baker. That was the portion of the city
that was set aside for a school by the Texas Town Lot
Company that originally surveyed the city. I went
on and did both my undergraduate work and my
graduate law work at Baylor. After
I got to Baylor.
Oh yes, I I'm very proud of my profession.
Very few people, I think, can get a proper
perspective of what the practice of law is about.
But what we are actually engaged in is the
administration of justice. And I assure you that
no society can long exist without it. Now, whether
or not We're doing it acceptably at this time,
might be argued on an individual basis, but
we have no other way to settle controversy between
individual members of our society.
And that has to be provided in some form.
When you were growing up and now, has there ever
been a lot of crime running on the station, or has it
been mostly small publics and things like that?
Has there ever been a great quantity
of crime? If it was, I was not aware of it.
We certainly
had...
crime from time to time, but
I was simply not conscious of it, though I was not
protected from it, not as an adult, and in a small
town, of course, not even as a child. Has there ever
been any, I don't really know how to put it, civil
rights with the black minority in Bryan. Any
trouble with that here at all? Have you ever felt
any trouble in Bryan over that issue?
No. Certainly there have been petitions and
discussions more recently. By that I mean in the
last 20 years. But...
it's very difficult to communicate and of course
i assume that any real militant militant could
attack us but in truth in fact
we have always had according to my
uh evaluation
a rather
responsible and sensitive group of people in both
what is now referred to as the white community and
the black community.
When I first came to Bryan, well, the so-called
Negro Elementary School was located on
Washington Avenue.
It was called Washington School and maybe it was on
Houston Street, but it was a very attractive
building. It had won two National Architectural
Awards and was really a building and that was
superior to, equal to, or superior to the other
elementary schools.
Shortly, as it became necessary, the Kemp High
School was built. And we simply did not have second
grade schools for the black community here. Brian
was very fortunate. has been in both the white and
the black area in that
in about 1919 they purchased the electric
utilities for the specific purpose of financing
the schools
and a lot of people don't know it now but of course
state financing and federal funding was not
available until 1948 when the Gilmer-Akin bill
was first passed in Texas. And during the
so-called Depression of 1929 through about 1934,
virtually
all the school districts, not just in Texas but in
the United States, could not pay any, they had no
money to pay anybody anyway. They paid in what was
called script, which was just a promissory note
that someday if they got some money, they'd pay.
People just had to survive as best they could. But
because of the electric utility funding in Bryan,
well, there was cash money available. pay
teachers, and as a consequence, the ability to
recruit the top quality was remarkable.
During that same period of time, the state of Texas
couldn't pay any salary. The state employees
received script, but not the teachers at A&M
because they were being paid out of the public
school funds, which came from the public lands of
Texas, the public school lands. But regular state
offices got paid in script. Those that were
dependent upon tax revenue, because nobody paid
any taxes in that period of time. Well, supposedly
they didn't. But in any event,
this built a tremendous stack of teachers and
particularly in the black schools
and we have just always had real
good communications between whites and blacks
here I feel and we had good schools perhaps not as
good as they should have been I don't know but I know
that They were certainly not downgraded or
disregarded. And we integrated our high school
here, I believe, within
a year after Brown v. School Board was decided.
Because I was a member of the school board, and I
took a copy of the Supreme Court opinion that Brown
v. School Board distributed to my fellow members.
told him i said i mean there was a lot of talk at that
time it's not going to be i mean over the south they
were saying well we're not going to do it and all
like that i told him i said forget about it it's here
it has already happened there's no arguing with it
so we ought to get with it and we started attempting
to identify at that time black students in the
black system that could, without any difficulty
or problem to themselves, move into the Stephen F.
Austin High School was called in and started doing
it.
We were in the process of integrating the high
school here long before many, many, many places
even gave it any consideration. Also, black
people have always been able to borrow money in
this community. That's something that very few
people know about. I don't ever remember a time
that a responsible black individual couldn't
obtain bank credit, the very best credit. He
didn't have to go to a backstreet shyster loan
company. He could go talk to the chief loan officer
of any bank in this community. I've seen it happen
many, many times. I know that I have waited in line
to see a loan officer while blacks preceded me, and
it was not offensive to me, and as far as I know, it
was never offensive to anyone. I know what's now
the first banking for us was the first state bank.
It was located here on Main Street. The building's
still standing. Right inside the main door was a
very long wooden settee and it was referred to here
as the mourners bench and then Mr. Higgs and Mr.
Delaney the two vice presidents and the main loan
officers of the bank sat right there immediately
visible to everyone behind a rail and the
customary practice and everybody did it was to go
in and take your place in line on the mourners bench
or stand in line and then Man at the head of the bench
went next. Well, my family owned substantial
stock in the bank. In fact, my uncle was the
president of it. Did not have offices in it. But I
transacted my business like that, just like
everybody else, and it was not... I mean, it was
just normal. The bond building and loan from the
day it was organized. has always accepted
applications and from black people for loans for
the building of homes and has has always had a
tremendous part of its clientele were
responsible black people that could qualify for
loans so i think these things contributed
i mean
it created good communications It's
always seemed to me that there's been very good
relations. I've lived here since probably 57. And
I've never noticed any trouble whatsoever. There
have been places, there'd be a fight or something
like that, but that happens everywhere. But it
always seems that everyone gets along pretty
well. well i think there are reasons for that and i
think they were built in many many many years ago
but uh the uh
like the primary thing was that
i guess that there was just real good
communications that primarily that the that it
was an open society, that blacks
were never closed off as such. Certainly, I mean,
they followed the, our social patterns were
identically the same as they were everywhere else
in the United
States.
In
Galveston Channel, my time today at 4.50 a.m. and
3.47 p.m. Low tide at 21 a.m. and 07 p.m. Sunset is
good today at 6.39. Our island today at 6.13.
Travelers
forecast balance
through Wednesday.
For the Dallas-Fort Worth area, chance of rain
this afternoon is going to be partly cloudy
tonight in Wednesday. Highs in the afternoon in
the upper 60s, low tonight, low 40s, high
Wednesday, upper 60s. For the Austin-San Antonio
area, mostly cloudy, becoming partly cloudy
tonight in Wednesday. Highs in the afternoon in
the mid-60s, low tonight, mid-40s, high
Wednesday, low 70s. Corpus Christi-Victoria
area, mostly cloudy, becoming partly cloudy ...
...
... ... We have north-northwest 13 miles per hour.
We're currently reporting from 29 to 18 to 90. The
outbound
temperature was 58. That hot is 61. The morning is
61 degrees. On the cloudy side, the outbound
temperature was 62 degrees. The humidity 68%.
Wind from the north-north east 17 to 25 miles per
hour.